# LumoSQL Code of Conduct

Version 1.2 – Updated 5th November, 2020

**This file exists because the LumoSQL Project needed it, less than one year
after starting. We take it seriously. Now we have the 2020 pandemic and
most of us are feeling a bit fragile... a bit of kindness helps too.**

The LumoSQL Project welcomes contributions from everyone who shares
[the LumoSQL Project Goals][https://lumosql.org/src/lumodoc/doc/trunk/doc/lumo-project-aims.md]
This document outlines both expected and prohibited behavior.

# Short Summary

LumoSQL participants are required to be respectful and direct with each other.
We will not tolerate bullying, racism, sexism or constant domineering
behaviour.  No personal attacks, stay focussed on what we are trying to
achieve. If you only read this much, it's a good start. 

[lumoaims]:https://lumosql.org/src/lumodoc/doc/trunk/doc/lumo-project-aims.md

# Who Should Feel Safe?

Everyone, regardless of diversity dimensions including:

    Gender, identity or expression
    Age
    Socioeconomic status
    Sex or sexual orientation
    Family status
    Race and/or caste and/or ethnicity
    National origin
    Religion
    Native or other languages

# When Should They Feel Safe?

    * Working with other LumoSQL community participants virtually or co-located
    * Representing LumoSQL at public events
    * Representing LumoSQL in social media

# What is Expected?

The following behaviors are expected of all LumoSQL community participants:

## Be Respectful

Value each other’s ideas, styles and viewpoints. Disagreement is no excuse for
poor manners. Be open to different possibilities and to being wrong. Take
responsibility, so if someone says they have been harmed through your words or
actions, listen carefully, apologize sincerely, and correct the behaviour.

## Be Direct but Professional

We must be able to speak directly when we disagree and when we think we need to
improve. We cannot withhold hard truths.  Doing so respectfully is hard, doing
so when others don’t seem to be listening is harder, and hearing such comments
when one is the recipient can be even harder still. We need to be honest and
direct.

## Be Inclusive

Seek diverse perspectives. Diversity of views and of people gives better
results.  Encourage all voices. Help new perspectives be heard and listen
actively. If you find yourself dominating a discussion, it is especially
important to step back and encourage other voices to join in. Observe how
much time is taken up by dominant members of the group.

## Appreciate and Accommodate Our Similarities and Differences

Be respectful of people with different cultural practices, attitudes and
beliefs. Work to eliminate your own biases, prejudices and discriminatory
practices. Think of others’ needs from their point of view. Use preferred
titles (including pronouns) and the appropriate tone of voice. Respect people’s
right to privacy and confidentiality. Be open to learning from and educating
others as well as educating yourself.

# Behavior That Will Not Be Tolerated

The following behaviors are considered to be unacceptable under these guidelines.

## Violence and Threats of Violence

Violence and threats of violence are not acceptable - online or offline. This
includes incitement of violence, including encouraging a person to commit
self-harm. This also includes posting or threatening to post other people’s
personally identifying information (“doxxing”) online.

## Derogatory Language

Hurtful or harmful language related to any dimension of diversity is not
acceptable.

This includes deliberately referring to someone by a gender that they do not
identify with, and/or questioning the legitimacy of an individual’s gender
identity. If you’re unsure if a word is derogatory, don’t use it. This also
includes repeated subtle and/or indirect discrimination; when asked to stop,
stop the behaviour in question.

## Unwelcome Sexual Attention or Physical Contact

This section is here because it has been proven to be needed. It is not some formality.

Unwelcome sexual attention online or offline, or unwelcome physical contact is
not acceptable. This includes sexualized comments, jokes or imagery in
interactions, communications or presentation materials, as well as
inappropriate touching, groping, or sexual advances. This includes touching a
person without permission, including sensitive areas such as their hair,
pregnant stomach, mobility device (wheelchair, scooter, etc) or tattoos. This
also includes physically blocking or intimidating another person. Physical
contact or simulated physical contact (such as emojis like “kiss”) without
affirmative consent is not acceptable. This includes sharing or distribution of
sexualized images or text.

# Consequences of Unacceptable Behaviour

Bad behavior from any LumoSQL community participant can't be tolerated.
Intentional efforts to exclude people (except as part of a consequence of these
guidelines) from LumoSQL activities are not acceptable.

Reports of harassment/discrimination will be promptly and thoroughly
investigated by the people responsible for the safety of the space, event or
activity. Appropriate measures will be taken to address the situation.

Anyone asked to stop unacceptable behaviour is expected to stop immediately.
Violation of these guidelines can result in you being ask to leave an event or
online space, either temporarily or for the duration of the event, or being
banned from participation in spaces, or future events and activities.

Any participants who abuse the reporting process will be considered to be in
violation of these guidelines and subject to the same consequences. False
reporting, especially to retaliate or exclude, will not be accepted or tolerated.

# Reporting

If you believe you’re experiencing unacceptable behavior that will not be
tolerated as outlined above please contact one of the [current authors](https://lumosql.org/src/lumosql/file?name=AUTHORS).

After receiving a concise description of your situation, they will review and
determine next steps. In addition to conducting any investigation, they can
provide a range of resources, from a private consultation to other community
resources. 

Please also report to us if you observe someone in distress or violations of
these guidelines, even if the situation is not happening to you.

If you feel you have been unfairly accused of violating these guidelines,
please follow the same reporting process.

*Heavily Adapted and Compressed from the surprisingly large version 3.1 of the 
[Mozilla Participation Guidelines](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/about/governance/policies/participation/)
and released under the 
[Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) license.*
